---
layout: post
date: 2025-09-01
title: Stoicism is Hard
---

I recently started rereading one of my all time favorite books, [The Practicing Stoic](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/37886498-the-practicing-stoic) by Ward Farnsworth. It's what you might expect from the title, a book on Stoicism. But the delivery of the material is so, so good.

It's reminded me of my love of Stoicism and my struggle with living the philosophy in my daily life. And I mean _struggle_. I've read and studied Stoicism for years, without anything to really show for it other than in the most difficult of times. 

## The Dichotomy of Control

Stoicism is an ancient philosophy founded, supposedly, by a man named Zeno of Citium. Zeno had a bad go of it and embraced a philosophy of only worrying about things he had control over. He realized that it was really his own thoughts, his judgements about things, that were what he experienced, not what was "out there."

That dichotomy of what we do and don't control is what Stoicism is all about. It means to get really clear about what those things are, and they aren't what they seem to be. In fact, we really don't have any control over anything other than ourselves, and even then, our control is quite limited. Ultimately, the only thing we truly control is what they called our "opinions", which are our judgement and thoughts about things. 

<div class="tenor-gif-embed" data-postid="24573780" data-share-method="host" data-aspect-ratio="0.934375" data-width="100%"><a href="https://tenor.com/view/your-opinion-gif-24573780">Your Opinion GIF</a>from <a href="https://tenor.com/search/your+opinion-gifs">Your Opinion GIFs</a></div> <script type="text/javascript" async src="https://tenor.com/embed.js"></script>

## Externals

The other category which the Stoics taught are "externals," things which happen and that we don't control. And this category is quite large, including many things that we, at least in 'merica, normally associate as _within_ our control. Things that happen to us, our environment, make sense, but they include our bodies, our health, our relationships, things we normally assume we have at least _some_ degree of control over.

To the Stoics, all of these external things, the things outside our own minds, were irrelevant to the most important questions a man (or woman) of philosophy can ask themselves. You see, they believed that only what we have control over could be truly good or bad; everything else, those things outside our control, was neither. And for the philosopher, good and bad are pivotal concepts. So the Stoics took a very metaphysical viewpoint on this topic, that "good" and "bad" only occur in our minds, not out there. As Marcus Aurelius said "Take away 'I have been harmed' and the harm is taken away."

## Not So Free

I happen to really like Stoicism and agree with it pretty much across the board. However, there is one major sticking point with me, and that is free will. From my perspective, it is clear that all our actions are the effects of prior causes, which puts me a little at odds with a core Stoic idea. 

But even with that fundamental disagreement, the rest of the philosophy resonates deeply with me. Just reading it can bring on a sense of calm and peacefulness. It would be so nice if I could maintain that feeling beyond the pages of the book.

## Reality

Unfortunately, after years of study and practice, I still can't manage to actually _be_ a Stoic. It's hard! And they knew it, even though they, being the founding and most famous Stoics, went through some extremely difficult times and held incredible responsibility, for more than I will ever experience. Respect where it's due. 

But living with a Stoic perspective isn't natural to me. It's too cognitive, and doesn't ever go very deep into my behavior. Kind of like a happy trip which has to come back down to earth when reality smacks me in the face. 

That doesn't stop me from loving a good book on the topic though, and I'm really enjoying my reread of The Practicing Stoic. The audible is great, too. Highly recommend. For me, even the failed attempts are worth something. And who knows? Maybe someone reading this will find Stoicism easier to implement in their daily lives than I have. 